Have you ever been
the victim of oppression or injustice?
Have you been angered by something
someone has said or done?
Who of us hasn’t?
In situations like that,
people who don’t know Jehovah
often react in a way
that’s far from peaceful.
They retaliate; they fight;
they hit back.
But we know that Jehovah
sees what happened,
and he can set matters straight.
We’re wise to remember the words of Jesus:
“Happy are the mild-tempered.”
“Happy are the peacemakers.”
The Bible describes a man
who remained mild and peaceable
in some extremely difficult
and stressful situations.
Repeatedly, he chose not to fight,
preferring a course that led to peace.
That man was Jacob.
Jacob learned from the peaceful example
of his father, Isaac.
There was a famine in the land,
and Isaac moved his family to Gerar,
which was ruled by Abimelech,
king of the Philistines.
Let’s read about the problems that arose
and see how Isaac dealt with them.
Please turn to Genesis 26:12.
“And Isaac began to sow seed in that land,
“and in that year he reaped
100 times what he sowed,
“for Jehovah was blessing him.
“The man became wealthy,
“and he continued to prosper
until he became very wealthy.
“He acquired flocks of sheep
and herds of cattle
“and a large body of servants,
“and the Philistines began to envy him.
“So the Philistines took soil
“and stopped up all the wells
that his father’s servants had dug
“in the days of Abraham.
“Abimelech then said to Isaac:
“‘Move from our neighborhood,
for you have grown far stronger than we are.’
“So Isaac moved from there
and encamped in the valley of Gerar
“and began dwelling there.
“And Isaac again dug the wells
“that had been dug
in the days of his father Abraham
“but that the Philistines had stopped up
after Abraham’s death,
“and he called them by the names
that his father had given them.
“When the servants of Isaac
were digging in the valley,
“they found a well of fresh water.
“And the shepherds of Gerar
“began quarreling
with the shepherds of Isaac, saying:
“‘The water is ours!’
“So he named the well Esek,
“because they had quarreled with him.
“And they started digging another well,
“and they began quarreling over it also.
“So he named it Sitnah.
“Later he moved away from there
and dug another well,
“but they did not quarrel over it.
“So he named it Rehoboth and said:
“‘It is because now Jehovah
has given us ample room
“and has made us fruitful in the land.’
“Then he went up from there to Beersheba.
“That night Jehovah appeared to him and said:
“‘I am the God of your father Abraham.
“‘Do not be afraid, for I am with you,
“‘and I will bless you
and multiply your offspring
on account of Abraham my servant.’”
The Philistines, motivated by envy,
stop up all the wells that Abraham had dug,
and the king asks Isaac
to move from the neighborhood.
Isaac now has a decision to make.
Perhaps some encourage him to stay put.
Think about how they might have reasoned:
‘You’ve done nothing wrong, Isaac.
‘Jehovah told you that you and your offspring
‘would possess the land.
‘You have nothing to fear.
‘You have many servants,
‘and they’re stronger than the Philistines.
‘Why not hit back
against those who have done this
to your wells?’
In this situation, what would you have done?
Isaac chooses a peaceful course.
He decides to move on.
This is not easy.
Isaac has many servants
and flocks of sheep and herds of cattle.
He has tilled the ground and planted seed,
and it’s produced plentifully,
but he leaves that behind and moves on.
But Isaac’s troubles are not over.
In his new location, his servants dig wells
and find fresh water.
But the shepherds in that area say:
“The water is ours!”
Isaac then digs another well,
but the local shepherds
quarrel about that one too.
Again, instead of fighting over the matter,
Isaac moves and finally finds a place
where he can reside in peace.
Jacob saw that his father’s peaceful actions
had a good effect,
and he knew that Isaac
had received Jehovah’s blessing.
What’s the lesson?
Parents, never underestimate
the powerful effect
your good example can have on your children.
Jacob has a twin brother, Esau.
Of the two, Esau is born first,
but Jehovah foretells
that—contrary to custom—
the older Esau will serve
his younger brother.
Jehovah foresees
what kind of personalities they’ll develop,
and he knows that Esau
will have little appreciation
for spiritual matters.
This becomes evident
when Esau exchanges his right as firstborn
for a mere bowl of stew,
sealing the matter with an oath.
But something more is involved.
In selling the birthright,
he also gives up the right
to receive a prophetic blessing
from his father.
Years pass, Isaac has grown old,
and he decides it’s time to impart
the blessing to his firstborn.
He may not know
that Esau had sold his right as firstborn.
In any case, he tells Esau
that he will bless him
but asks him first
to provide him with a tasty dish
of fresh game from the field.
Rebekah, the twins’ mother,
overhears this conversation
and persuades Jacob
to impersonate his twin brother
while Esau is out hunting.
The plan is successful.
Isaac unwittingly blesses Jacob!
Esau, at learning of this, is furious.
Let’s take up the account
from Genesis 27:41.
“However, Esau harbored
animosity against Jacob
“because of the blessing
his father had given him,
“and Esau kept saying in his heart:
“‘The days of mourning for my father
are getting closer.
“After that I am going to kill
Jacob my brother.’
“When the words of her older son Esau
were told to Rebekah,
“she at once sent for her younger son Jacob
“and said to him: ‘Look!
“‘Your brother Esau is planning
to take revenge by killing you.
“‘Now, my son, do as I say.
“‘Get up and run away
to my brother Laban at Haran.
“‘Dwell with him for a while
“‘until your brother’s rage calms down,
“‘until your brother’s anger
toward you subsides
“‘and he forgets what you have done to him.
“‘Then I will send for you from there.
“Why should I lose both of you in one day?’
“After that Rebekah kept saying to Isaac:
“‘I am disgusted with my life
because of the daughters of Heth.
“‘If Jacob ever takes a wife
from the daughters of Heth,
“‘like these daughters of the land,
“what good is my life?’
“So Isaac called Jacob
“and blessed him and commanded him, saying:
“‘You must not take a wife
from the daughters of Canaan.
“‘Go away to Paddanaram
“‘to the house of Bethuel,
your mother’s father,
“‘and from there take for yourself a wife
“‘from the daughters of Laban,
your mother’s brother.
“‘God Almighty will bless you
and make you fruitful and multiply you,
“‘and you will certainly become
a congregation of peoples.
“‘And he will give to you
the blessing of Abraham,
“‘to you and to your offspring with you,
“‘so that you may take possession of the land
where you have been living as a foreigner,
“which God has given to Abraham.’
“So Isaac sent Jacob away,
“and he departed for Paddanaram,
“to Laban the son of Bethuel the Aramaean,
the brother of Rebekah,
the mother of Jacob and Esau.”
Jacob’s parents tell him to travel
to his uncle, Laban,
to find a wife.
Of course, the core issue
is the problem with Esau.
Recall that earlier,
Isaac had a problem with the Philistines
—a problem that evidently
could not be settled peacefully.
So, what did Isaac do?
He moved on.
Now Jacob faces a similar situation.
His brother is seething with anger,
so Jacob leaves.
It means leaving his home and his family;
it means making a long journey
to a distant land.
Jacob could have chosen to stand his ground.
He owns the birthright.
He could argue the matter
with his father and mother:
‘I’m no child. I’m 77 years old!’
Jacob does none of those things.
The Bible simply says:
“Jacob obeyed his father and his mother
and departed.”
What’s the lesson?
When we face a situation
that can’t be settled peacefully,
we probably won’t need to flee for our lives
to a distant land.
Sometimes, however,
it is the course of wisdom
to walk away from a situation.
Proverbs 17:14 says:
“Beginning a fight
is like opening a floodgate;
before the quarrel breaks out,
take your leave.”
While Jacob is on his way to his uncle,
Jehovah appears to Jacob in a dream
and assures him
of his support and protection.
That does not mean
that Jacob’s troubles are over.
At the journey’s end,
he moves in with his uncle’s household.
In time, a situation arises again
that shows that Jacob
is a man who loves peace.
Let’s read about it from Genesis 29:16.
“Now Laban had two daughters.
“The name of the older was Leah,
“and the name of the younger, Rachel.
“But the eyes of Leah had no luster,
“whereas Rachel had become
“a very attractive and beautiful woman.
“Jacob had fallen in love with Rachel,
so he said:
“‘I am willing to serve you seven years
“for your younger daughter Rachel.’
“To this Laban said:
“‘It is better for me to give her to you
than to give her to another man.
“Keep dwelling with me.’
“And Jacob served seven years for Rachel,
“but in his eyes
they were like just a few days
“because of his love for her.
“Then Jacob said to Laban:
“‘Give over my wife because my days are up,
“and let me have relations with her.’
“With that Laban gathered
all the men of the place
“and made a feast.
“But during the evening,
he resorted to taking his daughter Leah
“and bringing her to him
that he might have relations with her.
“Laban also gave his female servant Zilpah
“to his daughter Leah as a servant.
“In the morning Jacob saw that it was Leah!
“So he said to Laban:
“‘What have you done to me?
“‘Was it not for Rachel that I served you?
“Why have you tricked me?’
“To this Laban said:
“‘It is not our custom here to give
the younger woman before the firstborn.
“‘Celebrate the week of this woman.
“‘After that you will also be given
this other woman
“in exchange for serving me
seven more years.’
“Jacob did so
and celebrated the week of this woman,
“after which he gave him
his daughter Rachel as a wife.
“Besides, Laban gave
his female servant Bilhah
to his daughter Rachel as her servant.”
Jacob has reason to be upset.
He had arranged with Laban
to work seven years for Rachel.
At the end of the seven years,
a wedding feast is arranged.
But the heavily-veiled woman
brought in to him
is not Rachel;
it’s Leah!
Imagine how shocked Jacob must have been!
Instead of admitting to his deceit,
Laban gives an excuse.
What thoughts come to Jacob’s mind?
Does he consider that Jehovah
might be working out his promise
to make Jacob’s offspring plentiful
“like the dust particles of the earth”?
We don’t know.
As it turns out,
Leah bears him six sons,
including Levi and Judah
—family heads of the two
most honored tribes of Israel.
Of course,
Jacob couldn’t have foreknown this.
Still, Jacob the peacemaker
accepts Leah
and goes along
with Laban’s outrageous request
that he work an additional seven years
for Rachel.
What’s the lesson?
It’s disappointing when others
don’t hold to their agreements.
Like Jacob, can we find it in our hearts
to forgive and find a way
to preserve peace with them?
Jacob serves Laban
for 14 years for his two wives,
and he works for Laban another 6 years
for a flock of his own.
Finally, at Jehovah’s direction,
he gathers his family along with his animals
and, without informing Laban,
he leaves for home.
When Laban learns of this, he is furious!
He chases and catches up with Jacob.
This is a dangerous situation,
one that can easily turn violent.
Imagine how it might have been:
Jacob had come to a mountainous region.
Possibly it’s morning, and the air is cool.
There are the sounds and smells of animals
—sheep, donkeys, camels; there are many.
The servants attend to them,
getting them ready for the day’s journey.
But then come cries of alarm.
Laban has come, and he’s not alone.
He arrives with strong men.
They gallop in on camels; they dismount.
This is not a friendly visit.
Laban’s men are ready
to obey orders from Laban.
Jacob’s servants quickly gather to the scene.
All eyes are fixed on Laban and Jacob,
who argue.
The previous night,
Jehovah had warned Laban in a dream
to be careful about what he’d say to Jacob.
Still, Laban is angry and aggressive.
Laban makes two charges.
First, he says:
“Why have you resorted to outwitting me
“and carrying my daughters off like captives
“taken by the sword?
“Why did you run away secretly
and outwit me and not tell me?”
The answer to that charge is obvious.
Jacob replies:
“It was because I was afraid,
“for I said to myself,
‘You might take your daughters
away from me by force.’”
Laban also charges that Jacob has stolen
his household gods.
Rachel has indeed stolen the gods,
but Jacob knows nothing about this.
A search is made,
but the idols are not found.
Jacob then makes his defense.
Let’s take up our reading
at Genesis 31:36.
“At that Jacob became angry
“and began to criticize Laban.
“Jacob then said to Laban:
“‘What is my offense, and for what sin
are you hotly pursuing me?
“‘Now that you have searched
through all my goods,
“‘what have you found
that belongs to your house?
“‘Put it here in front of my brothers
and your brothers,
“‘and let them decide between the two of us.
“‘During these 20 years
that I have been with you,
“‘your sheep and your goats never miscarried,
“‘and I never ate the rams of your flock.
“‘I did not bring you any animal
torn by wild beasts.
“‘I would stand the loss of it myself.
“‘Whether the animal was stolen by day
or was stolen by night,
“‘you would demand compensation from me.
“‘By day the heat consumed me,
and the cold by night,
“‘and sleep would flee from my eyes.
“‘This makes 20 years for me in your house.
“‘I have served you 14 years
for your two daughters
“‘and 6 years for your flock,
“‘and you kept changing my wages ten times.
“‘If the God of my father, the God of Abraham
“‘and the One whom Isaac fears,
“‘had not been on my side,
“‘you would now have sent me away
empty-handed.
“‘God has seen my affliction
and the toil of my hands,
“and that is why he reproved you last night.’
“Then Laban answered Jacob:
“‘The daughters are my daughters
and the children my children
“‘and the flock my flock,
“‘and everything you are looking at
“‘is mine and my daughters’.
“‘What can I do today against these
or against their children
“‘whom they have borne?
“‘Now come, let us make a covenant,
you and I,
“and it will serve as a witness between us.’
“So Jacob took a stone
and set it up as a pillar.
“Then Jacob said to his brothers:
‘Pick up stones!’
“And they took stones and made a pile.
“After that they ate there
on the pile of stones.
“And Laban began calling it Jegarsahadutha,
“but Jacob called it Galeed.
“Laban then said:
“‘This pile of stones is a witness
“between me and you today.’
“That is why he named it Galeed,
and the Watchtower,
“for he said:
“‘Let Jehovah keep watch between you and me
“‘when we are out of each other’s sight.
“‘If you mistreat my daughters
“‘and if you start taking wives
in addition to my daughters,
“‘though there is no man with us,
“remember that God will be a witness
between you and me.’
“Laban went on to say to Jacob:
“‘Here is this pile of stones,
“‘and here is the pillar
that I have erected between you and me.
“‘This pile of stones is a witness,
“‘and the pillar
is something that bears witness,
“‘that I will not pass beyond this pile
of stones to bring harm to you
“‘and you will not pass
beyond this pile of stones
“‘and this pillar to bring harm to me.
“‘Let the God of Abraham
and the God of Nahor,
“the God of their father, judge between us.’
“And Jacob swore by the One
“whom his father Isaac fears.
“After that Jacob offered
a sacrifice in the mountain
“and invited his brothers to eat bread.
“So they ate
and spent the night in the mountain.
“However, Laban got up early in the morning
“and kissed his grandchildren
and his daughters and blessed them.
Then Laban departed and returned home.”
Jacob had served Laban faithfully
for 20 years,
even though Laban had defrauded
and exploited him.
Laban doesn’t acknowledge that
but, rather, dishonestly claims
that he is the rightful owner
of all that Jacob has with him.
Laban then suggests
that they make a covenant of peace
ensuring that neither family
will bring harm to the other.
Laban’s motive is not that he loves peace.
It might have been to ensure
that Jacob will not return
with the household gods after Laban’s death
to deprive his sons of their inheritance.
In any case, Jacob agrees;
everyone relaxes;
there’s to be no violence.
And a monument is set up
to memorialize the agreement.
Despite the many years of oppression,
Jacob agrees to a covenant of peace.
He does not harbor resentment
or seek revenge.
That crisis is over for Jacob.
But now another one looms.
Jacob sends messengers to his brother.
They say that Jacob is returning
and that he seeks Esau’s favor.
The messengers return with the news
that Esau is on his way to meet him
and with him are 400 men.
Oh, my!
Is Esau still angry?
Understandably, Jacob is worried.
He does not want to fight with his brother.
Let us see how he handles the situation.
Please turn to Genesis 32:13.
“And he spent the night there.
“Then he took some of his possessions
“as a gift for Esau his brother:
“200 female goats, 20 male goats,
“200 female sheep, 20 rams,
“30 camels nursing their young,
“40 cows, 10 bulls,
“20 female donkeys
“and 10 full-grown male donkeys.
“He handed them over to his servants,
“one drove after another,
“and he said to his servants:
“‘Cross over ahead of me,
“and you are to set a space
between one drove and the next.’
“He also commanded the first one:
“‘In case Esau my brother
should meet you and ask,
“‘“To whom do you belong,
and where are you going,
“‘and to whom do these ahead of you belong?”
“‘then you should say,
“To your servant Jacob.
“‘“It is a gift sent to my lord, to Esau,
“and look! he himself is also behind us.”’
“And he commanded also the second, the third,
“and all those following the droves:
“‘According to this word,
“‘you are to speak to Esau when you meet him.
“‘And you should also say,
““Here is your servant Jacob behind us.”’
“For he said to himself:
“‘If I appease him
by sending a gift ahead of me,
“‘then afterward when I see him,
he may give me a kindly reception.’”
Jacob wants peaceful relations
with his brother.
He sends a generous gift
—hundreds of animals—
to help make that possible.
Was Jacob weak-minded,
too cowardly to stand up to his brother?
Not at all!
Why, as the time neared
for the meeting with Esau,
Jacob wrestles with an angel until dawn
to receive further assurance
of Jehovah’s blessing.
Let’s now see what happens
when the two brothers meet.
Please turn to Genesis 33:1.
“Now Jacob raised his eyes
“and saw Esau coming,
“and 400 men were with him.
“So he divided the children
among Leah, Rachel,
“and the two female servants.
“He put the female servants
and their children in front,
“Leah and her children after them,
“and Rachel and Joseph behind them.
“Then he himself went ahead of them
“and bowed down to the earth seven times
“as he came near to his brother.
“But Esau ran to meet him,
“and he embraced him and kissed him,
“and they burst into tears.
“When he raised his eyes
and saw the women and the children,
“he said: ‘Who are these with you?’
“To which he said:
“‘The children with whom God
has favored your servant.’
“At that the female servants
came forward with their children
“and bowed down,
“and Leah too came forward with her children,
“and they bowed down.
“Then Joseph came forward with Rachel,
“Esau said:
“‘What is the purpose of all this camp
of travelers that I have met?’
“He replied: ‘In order to find favor
“in the eyes of my lord.’
“Then Esau said:
“‘I have a great many possessions,
my brother.
“Keep what is yours.’
“However, Jacob said:
“‘No, please.
“‘If I have found favor in your eyes,
“‘you must take my gift from my hand,
“‘because I brought it
so that I could see your face.
“‘And I have seen your face
“‘as though seeing God’s face,
“‘in that you received me with pleasure.
“‘Take, please,
“‘the gift conveying my blessing
that was brought to you,
“‘for God has favored me
“and I have everything I need.’
And he continued to urge him,
so that he took it.”
What a happy outcome!
Instead of an angry confrontation,
there is a joyful reunion.
The two men shed tears; they embrace.
Again, Jacob is the peacemaker.
How did he prove that?
He prayed, and he acted in harmony
with his prayers.
He sent gifts.
He showed honor and respect to his brother,
calling him lord
and bowing seven times.
What’s the lesson?
Doesn’t this account well illustrate
the extent to which we
should be willing to go
to preserve peace
with our Christian brothers and sisters?
We learn so much
about seeking peace from Jacob.
When threatened by his brother
while living at home,
he moved away.
When deceived by Laban
regarding Rachel and Leah,
he yielded.
When chased down and accused by Laban,
Jacob agreed to a covenant of peace.
And when confronting Esau, he offered a gift.
Keep in mind,
in none of these situations
was Jacob the one who needed to apologize.
Yet, throughout his life,
Jacob loved peace.
He relied on Jehovah,
and Jehovah blessed him.
Jehovah never forgot Jacob
and how he pursued peace
in his dealings with others.
When we do the same
—when we pursue peace
in the face of injustice,
in the face of persecution,
in small issues as well as in big issues—
Jehovah will not forget us either.
Jehovah will richly bless us
if we love peace
just as Jacob loved peace.